---
date: 2024-09-22
---

Men want to know where consciousness goes after death. They should be just as concerned with the question of where consciousness comes from. Intelligent men will tell you it is the chemicals in your brain that make up consciousness; it is the chain reactions, themselves governed by molecular, atomic, then quantum laws, that ultimately compose consciousness. But you are not your feelings. You are not your pain. You are not even your memories nor your experience of the world. It suffices to say that you are brainmatter just as it would be to say that a home is a house or that a book is a collection of the printed word. What is a book anyway? Is it the words themselves, the sum of pages, or the version of the person who wrote the words, who existed only in that moment and never before and indeed never again? Or is the book the reader who consumes the words and grants them meaning, an experience altogether separate from the process by which the words formed? It does not suffice to say that men are their brainmatter. Not insofar as books are their words and a home is a house. The brain is simply a vessel -- a robe to be discarded when it is no longer of use to the consciousness who temporarily inhabited it.

For there to be a universe, there must be an observer. For there to be an observer there must be a window. But the window itself is of no consequence. Yet the universe would not exist without either of these things. That is the illusion that is life. When we are born, a drop of seawater is formed from the body of a great ocean in perpetual motion. Does the droplet become a thing in itself simply because it has been separated from the waves? Just as soon as the droplet is formed, it is then returned to the ocean. That is death.

The answer is this: consciousness goes to the same place from which it was born. Before I was me and you were you, we occupied the same state, and there was no distance between us. Life is but a temporary severance of our cosmic union; a minor inconvenience, really. Rest assured that the inevitability of death is a different name for the inexplicability of life.
